Ordinary is provided.
Thank you very much for, uh, uh, coming
before us this morning,
and thank you very much for the information you
provided also for us to have the opportunity
to read for this hearing.
Um, so, uh, this morning we have a, a approximately, uh,
45 minutes, uh, with you
and as a committee, uh, the Maori first committee.
We, we've got an endeavor here, uh,
to basically follow up on the Auditor General's report,
which, uh, I think you're familiar with.
And the order to general, uh, the focus of
that report was seeing how well the Crown
and also public organizations are going
with fulfilling its commitments within the treaty.
Settlements. A very important situation for us
as a committee, uh, but I'm, I'm sure for the Crown as well.
And so we've had a number of hearings today, uh, to, uh,
to identify, uh, where the successes are, uh,
but also where some of the challenges are.
And we want this just to be a very open conversation.
And, uh, I'll ask for you
to provide some opening comments to begin with.
But yeah, just enter into dialogue
because we want the best outcome we can, um,
and information gathering for us as a committee to,
to take it further in, in, in the house here itself.
So, no welcome this morning. Thank you.
And I'll, the floor is yours,
Everybody. Um,
so my name's Ka Ani. I'm the chair of Una.
Um, and I'll let some
my colleagues introduced themselves. Yeah,
Ura, uh, Robert McLean, principal advisor for Te
Bishop.
So environmental manager.
I jump my remi of my, so, we're we'll, uh, public, uh,
hearing this one here.
So it's been live streamed
as well, just so that you're aware of that.
Okay. Yep. Shorter. Yes. Okay,
Lovely. But,
Um, It's a great opportunity to have this discussion.
Um, there have been, uh, a number of, um, developments for
in recent years, or last 200 years, really,
and we've shared them with you
and how we've been able to work together some
of the challenges that we faced and, and where we are today.
I, I did wanna start with the context, though, to, to,
to tell you who we are and how we came to be where we are.
Um, so the year we, we represent is Nati.
Um, our, our is, uh, from through po
po Wellington and the upper, um, south Island, uh,
and Nati mate came here, uh, in around about 1820.
Uh, that was a period of, of, um,
what you could call Civil War in the Waikato,
which is where we're originally from.
So, TI Tour traveled here in, um, 1820, uh,
um, for a number of reasons.
Um, we eventually settled in Kati
and made, uh, Kati Island, um, our,
our home, our stronghold.
And then, and from there expanded across the area
and across the Cook Strait as well.
Um, so the areas of significance
that we'll talk about today include Kati Island itself, um,
URA Harbor, um, um, uh,
tap Island.
And, uh, Laura sounds in the South.
Well, there are more, but these are all relevant
to the discussion that we're having today.
Um, it's, uh, important to notice that the, the thing
that we want to state, of course, is our support for Teti
and the vision of Teti Treaty of Wa that our,
that our two pointer had assigned the treaty twice, well,
signed it twice actually.
Um, Henry Williams bought the, uh, the Treaty South,
in which a number of our, our signs,
and that was, uh, so what was his name?
Bunbury Bunbury brought it up from the north from, from the,
uh, from the south island, and that there again as well.
And so this was a, uh, a,
a time of turmoil for us, for a lot of people, of course.
So at that particular time, this was at the,
pretty much the tail end of, of the musket walls.
And there was a lot of
difficulty happening at the same time.
The New Zealand company, of course, had arrived
and they had a, um, had ambitions that weren't,
that didn't correlate with what the Crown model to do.
Um, so, uh, NATO signed, uh, um,
and with the activities of the New Zealand company, um,
things got a bit rough for a little while.
Many of you will be familiar with, uh, the re mm-hmm.
And that was a, an example of, um,
what happened when the New Zealand company were trying
to get ahold of land that they, they weren't entitled to.
And following on from that, in 1845 was the farm incident.
So if you go over to, um, lower Hu Hospital,
look across the road, there's a park there.
And that, um, that is a reference to, um, to a skirmish
that happened at that particular, um,
time involving our Chief Tara.
The reason that these are, are relevant is that, um,
George Gray was the governor by that time,
and he, uh, took actions declared military law,
and he, he kidnapped our chief Tara
and drove Tara out out of the, out of the area.
Um, this was about 1846,
and he used this to coerce Tito into selling a large portion
of the Wao, the Wao Valley in Lenna,
but also the lands from approximately Marketa all the way up
to Koki.
Um, and so this has been, um, a, a, a, a painful time
for memory for us.
There was some revert reserves left for us, and,
and that's where we still are today.
So this is in the T Bay area, the UA area.
Um, but over time, that has shrunk with things like the, um,
the, um, uh, native SX of the 1860s, et cetera.
The reason that's important is that in 1847, when our chief
was released, he was ca he was held captive
and Sydney Lee while, um, George Gray, um,
negotiated on the sale of his lands, uh,
when he was released, he was devastated.
But, uh, he, his son, Tam Para, had a different view.
Now, he'd been educated at St.
John's Anglican Church in Auckland,
and what he saw, uh, the future for Maori
was the Anglican Church education
and adopting the ways of the European to work more together.
Um, and so what he did in, in 1848 was convince his father
and a number of others to give a large amount
of land in Northern Te Tahi Bay to the Anglican Church.
Now, this is, um, so that was gifted in 1848.
In the letter that he, that they wrote, uh, indicates the,
the, the purpose, uh, the, the, the deal, shall we say,
for the, uh, transfer of that land was to create a school.
Uh, the idea that if we have a school there,
then our children can go there.
The children of the wider RO here can go there,
the church can, can grow, and everybody would be better off.
When we, as we look back on it,
that is probably a very good example of
what could have been.
It's, it's an example of a partnership, right?
Where, where, where, uh, Maori had a resource
and they wanted to contribute it, uh, to work
with the Anglican Church, with the crown, uh,
for the betterment of the whole community.
Now, in 1850, um,
George Gray was handing up Crown Grants, frankly,
and he wrote a Crown grant to, uh, gu uh, the Bishop
of Wellington at the time, granting them
that that particular land.
And on that, he said, um, that it is
for the purposes of school.
Now, the school was never built.
Um, and over the decades, uh, our people
petitioned parliament went through the courts,
in fact, to have that land returned.
It never, it never was returned.
Uh, you might be, uh, aware of a 1877 Supreme Court ruling
by Justice James pre gust.
And his ruling was, um, to summarize, I'm no legal expert,
but to, to summarize, um, his point was
of rejecting the claim
that the land should either be returned
or the school school built, was
that the treaty was a simple nuity,
and that Maori were incapable of, uh, uh,
taking up the responsibilities of, uh, civil by society.
Um, and so this, that's a very painful, uh,
moment in history for us at,
but also for all Maori, because it's the precedent.
Yeah. Okay. So bring
that forward now to the, um, to the 1970s when a lot of our,
our una um, started really the resurgence through the, um,
uh, urban Maori movement of Ta Maori.
So I'm thinking of people like, um, Dan Kupa, um, Eva Ard,
um, Nui Walker, et cetera.
Those were, uh, very important, um, times in,
uh, Maori history.
And it opened the way with the establishment of the, uh,
Tang Tribunal in 1975 for Iwi
to make claims against those
things that have happened in the past.
And so, in, um, Nati to
submitted our claim in, uh, late 1980s,
I forget the exact year, and it wasn't until 2012
that we reached a settlement on that in 2014, it went into,
into, um, into legislation.
Okay. So, and,
and at that time, it's a matter of public record
that the value at the time was approximately $75 million
transferred to TE is compensation for, uh,
the breaches of the treaty.
The, the, the, um, re transaction was one of them,
but there are, uh, others as well.
Um, $75 million, by our estimation,
is approximately 1.6% of, of what was taken.
So, so having said that, it, it, it's a start, you know,
and, and I believe, I think we believe that, um, all peoples
need at least a minimum level of resources to,
to start moving forward, you know, to start doing something.
Mm-hmm. And so this was, this has been a good
start, but there's a wrong way to go.
Um, today, this year, uh, ti
s assets are just over $1 billion.
So in terms of assets,
we're approximately the fourth largest iwi in the country.
We employ 480 people in po.
Um, we, let's see,
we've established a Tahu de Moay, one of the largest, um,
uh, community housing providers.
We managed 900 houses on behalf of Kor in, uh, Western.
Uh, we were successful in, in, uh, our bid
to be the final water commissioning agency.
So Mahu Toga is what we've established there.
We're also, uh, I'm told Department of Education,
largest just landlord in the area.
We own the land of, of 60 schools throughout from, um,
URA Bay all the way down to, um,
into the Hut Valley as well.
Um, so this is an example of where we've, um, leveraged
what we have so far for the betterment
of our people and of the community.
We believe in the vision of ity, which is,
which is working together.
You know, I, I think we've got, we're on a, a good path.
Now, the challenge, though is in the cultural redress space.
Okay. And the reason that's a challenge is
that we don't have the power that we would need
to fix some of the things that need fixing.
And, and an example to us, very dear to us, is the Harbor.
Um, our grandparents talk about the Harba being their aka
Kai, where, where they would go for their food.
Um, it, it, it, uh,
after the reclamation of large areas of land
to establish the Portor Hospital, um, a lot
of our seabirds were, um, were destroyed at that time.
And if you go to Portor Harbor now, um,
you can wave Wade across many places.
You're more likely to see traffic cones and,
and fishing trolleys in you are, you are, um, a seafood.
And so this is hugely disappointing,
and we have a vision
that we can restore it to what it used to be.
It's a big job, and we can't do it alone.
And we've been working with,
and this is just one example of where we, uh, una mate need
to work with other agencies to do that.
Last year we established a URA Harbor Accord,
and that includes other agencies such
as Greater Wellington Regional Council, Porto City Council,
Wellington Regional Council,
and hopefully we can make some,
make some progress in that particular area.
So, so that's, it's one particular example.
Uh, just, um, uh,
if you've been looking in Maori news over the last week,
that land came back to last week on Friday.
Mm. So we, um, we was returned to us.
And so we are really happy about that.
We bought it, um, not to subdivide it, not to sell it, not
to build houses on it, but
because it's our, it's our, it's our land.
And so we, we are really happy about that.
And the arrangement that we have then is we lease it back
to Radio New Zealand, and we continue to work
with Greater Wellington Regional Council on the, um, uh,
the, the committee that, um, is responsible for caring
for all of the Peninsula as well.
So that's just a, a, a, um, a touch on where we are at, um,
some of the successes we've had,
but there's a long way to go.
And I'm gonna invite Robert to speak to more
of those examples, if that's
Absolutely, yeah, go, go.
Um, thank you, thank you Committee for,
for having us here today.
I won't, I won't, uh, add too much on onto that,
but you have our written, uh, statement here.
Yes. And I just thought I'd just highlight a couple
of key points fo following on this.
Um, and just, just on page five,
we talk about the settlement of 2012, the deed
of settlement, and,
and believing that there was no doubt when the Crown
apologized in 2012, that apology was genuine
and the Crown was ready to become a better partner
under tgi.
And, and that apology acknowledgement redress is,
is just a starting platform of starter first step.
And we are really encouraged by the report of the, uh,
auditor General, because it really highlights this
concept of holistic intention.
Because if you look at, for example, statue acknowledgement,
like te, if you go to the settlement,
and it will outline some of the values
and the statement of acknowledge, uh, statement
of association, but it doesn't give, give you
what we've just talked about, a pathway towards restoration.
It's not in the settlement.
So we today, as partners
with Greater Wellington Regional Council,
pottery City Council, and so forth, have an opportunity
and a challenge to, to,
to restore building on the settlement.
So that's what the settlement has very much provided for us.
And in, and as you can see on, uh, appendix One,
there's actually lots of projects.
It keeps us all very busy, uh, that we're, we are working on
with the regional council.
Uh, but among those, the priorities for US
Harbor, and another one, which is more
with the Department of Conservation is, is Ty Island.
So those are the three ones, but they're not the only ones.
They've got, uh, we've got Queen Elizabeth Park up at,
uh, working with, um,
with that one and the regional council,
Belmont Regional Park, battle
Hill, there's probably others.
I'm looking at Amy, there's probably others there.
So there, there's lots going on. Yeah.
Uh, but in the future, there's more opportunities there.
And as yet, we haven't initiated the preparation
of the Poarch plan.
The TKI plan is cultural redress covering Te
Moana, so the cook straight.
So that's still to, to be worked on,
can't do everything all at once,
but, you know, we've gotta stage it out.
But setting those, those priorities, um,
and then calling others to help is, is the key.
And I think with tia, I've just got a copy
of the Harbor Accord here that we signed, uh,
at Wai here, Maria, on my day.
I, I think the value of this is not just
with the signatories at the top, um, the,
the local authorities in Wellington Water,
but also the number of community groups that are involved in
that, such as, um, the Harbor Trust, the Guardians of
the Friends of, I mean, to be honest, there's lots
of friends of groups.
Um, so, so we are kind
of pulling them all in on this common, common goal,
if you like, common vision.
And so the catchment, uh,
working towards a new catchment action plan, um, well,
a draft by this year.
Um, I don't know if there's anything, Amy,
that you'd wanna highlight with some of these other projects
or, um, maybe talk to the, perhaps the, the island one that
a very, uh, um, significant landscape that we all know of,
type, perhaps tell, talk about that particular one,
what your, you know, work's, been progress today
and what challenges are moving forward.
Okay, sure. And so, so, um, I'll start
and then over to the team.
Sorry, Amy, I didn't mean to No, no, no, no. It's okay.
Um, uh, Kati Island, uh, was well known
as our home in the, in the 1820s, 1830s.
It was a part of our, uh, uh, settlement.
Our attempt at settlement was to have a lot of, uh,
significant lands returned to us.
Uh, and despite the apology that we couldn't secure
that particular land, now
that was transferred into crown ownership around the,
around 1900.
And the purpose for that was, um, uh, a nature reserve.
And I dunno if you've been there,
but it is just wonderful to go there.
Yeah. You know, so, so no matter what happens is committed
to it staying like that, but you, you can go there and,
and, um, you walk down the track and,
and a flock of port pigeons would fly across your path.
You won't see that on the main man. No.
They, they aren't out there. If you walk out at night,
you can literally see Kiwi.
It's a wonderful place. It really is.
We are entirely, um, supportive of maintaining that.
Um, it, it's still a, a pain for us about how it was,
how it was acquired, uh, and, uh, and we lost it.
So we were attempting to have those lands returned to us.
We weren't successful with that.
Um, but we were, you'll be familiar
with the vesting and gift back program.
So that happened, um, this year where, uh, Kati vested in
for a period of 10 days,
and it was given back to the, the, the,
uh, nation as a gift.
Um, having said that, I think it was
around a hundred hectares remain in
our position on the northern end.
Um, so those, that particular land is held
as if under the Reserves Act of 1977.
So the whole area is a, is a dock reserve.
And so we, it maintains the coop.
Now, part of our settlement includes a, um, a, a committee
and a management plan where we work with, um, uh,
K-C-D-C-G-W-R-C
and dock, uh, to determine a plan for the management of,
of Copper Tea Island as well.
What else can you say? Yeah, so, so the other thing just
to add there, so that, that northern block was returned
and still managed as a scenic nature reserve, sorry.
Then there's also one he there of land in the Northern end
for a, for a, yeah.
That's set apart in the settlement.
So that's again, uh, a something for the future to work on.
Mm-hmm. Uh, it will probably require a plan change with KCDC
to, for rezoning and that sort of thing.
So that's something for the opportunity for the future.
Um, and I think with, so with, uh, the company Iron
and Strategic Advisory Committee, Kazak Kai,
we call it Kazak, uh, that's if you like, it's kind
of like a cross between crow governance advisory kind
of entity.
Uh, and that's responsible for the approval
with the Wellington Conservation Board of the, uh,
conservation management plan, which is a bespoke
conservation plan for the island, which we now are starting
to prepare for with the Department of Conservation.
And the only spanner in the works there is, uh, the current
reforms to the Conservation Act, um, which have an idea
of reforming the current regime
of management plans and, uh, so, so forth.
So that's something we're working with
the Department of Conservation on year.
So it's tricky when you've got redress, uh, in a settlement
that was negotiated on the basis of the legislation
of the day, whether it was the RMA, uh,
conservation Act or what have you.
So, so of course
that settlement redress based on those provisions
of the ACT right now, if we are amending acts of parliament.
So that's quite a delicate balance,
and it actually is quite diverting a diversion where
it can suck up resources, responding to reforms
and whatever.
Um, when we, our priorities is, is to get on
and implement this settle.
It's a very good point, good point out there.
Uh, Michael, we, we've got approximately 20 minutes, uh,
remaining time with you.
I, I want to give the members an opportunity that,
and maybe if I could just start this off.
Um, I, I've mentioned that we've had the opportunity
to have a number of ministry
departments in front of us as well.
Um, and I think one of the challenges we have is the crown.
We talk about the crown, but the crown is a, a big beast.
It's got many, many different moving components to it.
And, uh, the, there's a lack of consistency is
what we observe between different departments.
And perhaps it would be helpful,
'cause we don't know what we don't know.
It would be helpful if you could talk to perhaps some
of the more challenging parts of the redress
of the moving forward.
We always talk about treaty settlements,
and it's often said that a settlement isn't a, a,
a stop when the settlement's made.
It's actually the beginning of where we're going type thing.
So perhaps, could you talk to us a bit about perhaps more
of the challenging places, the places
where we could potentially have influence to actually fix
and to get better outcomes itself?
So we start with your
Voice. Yeah. Come on.
Um, I think some
of the challenges, um, particularly around implementation
of our settlement is obviously resourcing and capacity.
Um, you know, it's, we,
I don't think Nati to ever had the intent to be able
to deliver on all of the add redress immediately.
It's gonna take time, um, as well
as building up those relationships with our partners
to find those shared outcomes.
Mm-hmm. Um, I think, uh,
and this is more speaking operationally, um, to try
and find those outcomes for not just iwi, um, uh, council
and and community,
but it's about working smarter in the way
that we, we deliver things.
Yeah. Um, and so in terms of
how we set our annual plan priorities around our,
our current redress is to ensure that it aligns,
um, with our partners.
Because actually a lot
of those tile outcomes are the same things that a community
and regional council is seeking.
Um, and they just, you know,
and I think that's just that, uh, recognition of a, a lot
of those, um, reserves that are managed by, um,
or owned by Dock and,
and managed by regional council that's significant sites
for, um, and so naturally it's important for us.
And then respectively, it's, it's important for,
for regional councils.
So talking about that alignment, clearly we,
we will be hearing from and I,
and the crew from, uh, greater Wellington shortly, um,
but also the Crown Departments is it's alignment there.
So this all comes back to communications. Absolutely.
Could your parents talk about that communications line
and the success or the challenges with it?
Yeah. So we have, uh, really great relationship
with Greater Wellington Regional Council.
It's, um, definitely evolved.
Um, I could probably speak more towards, uh, for, um,
for apart where we are working together on a
transition plan for, um, iwi to, in the future, be able
to potentially manage our mona.
So that means that we have our own people
as the arrangers on the Mona.
Um, there's a co-design of the management plan,
and we've already progressed, um, to a space
where we've been able to, this is just an example, um,
you know, have a 0.2 FD of a ranger that is an on our Mona,
that, that, that's a significant, um,
achievement throughout ub, um, in comparison to
how things have, if we look back to when we first settled,
you know, that's a huge accomplishment.
And I think for our people, um, our
boots on the ground is the most, um, meaningful thing
for them to see their own people, uh,
in these spaces. Yeah.
Very good. Yeah.
And, and just on those challenges,
because with a lot of cultural reduce with the reserves,
a lot of land returned, has lot, lots of strings attached
to that land returned.
It's, it's not like land gets returned in the settlement,
you can just do what you like with it.
A majority is reserves act classification and so forth.
And just, and I just, sorry to, just to change tact about
that consistency.
Um, I have got a paragraph in here about the right
of first refusal,
and we very much support the recommendations of the, uh,
of the auditor general, uh, regard to greater consistency
with the rfs, especially in, in the top of the south.
Um, so just, just putting, putting that one,
getting a question from Steve.
Yeah. Kiara, thank you so much,
and thank you for this Substative, uh, report.
I'm interested in that relationship with, um, your land
and the encumbrances that come with obligations such
as reserves.
Um, we have this history of a strange English idea that, um,
nature is separate from people.
Mm-hmm. So if we're preserving nature, you have
to remove all the people, which is part of the
terrible history of what happens at Iwi in terms of
places such as Kati, and I know little barrier.
How do you reconcile that
or how do you seek to change that attitude?
And, um, whereby, you know, we are part of nature
and nature is part of us
and is a barrier to that,
those encumbrances with the settlement that you have to
preserve it under a kind of a,
a somewhat archaic English idea of reserves.
Yep.
So, sorry. And, and carry out.
Um, the issue of our al is one of one
of our top priorities, you know, close to our top priority.
Um, and I think the value that Ta Maori brings, certainly
bring, um, is, is exactly that,
that we are not separate from t.
And so if we, um, disrespect say, uh,
or damage the t we're damaging ourselves.
Now there's a spiritual element to that, you know?
Um, but that is not unhealthy in this day and age.
We, if we refer to, I spoke about it earlier, it's in a,
it's in a shocking state.
Um, and I think thinks a part of that is
because of this dis disconnection
between people and the land.
The, the idea that the land is a, is a resource
to be traded and utilized.
Um, the, the difference with I think a,
a tal Maori approach is the intergenerational nature
of, of the vision.
Um, an example is, I spoke about, um,
how we went through the RFR settlement
and purchased the land of round about 60 schools.
It's just the land, right?
Um, we had to go into quite a bit of debt for that.
Um, and in my lifetime, I won't see any value.
The reason is that we lease it back to,
to Department of Education.
They pay the, they pay the, um, uh, the rent.
And that goes back to paying, uh, paying off that debt.
I won't see the value. Maybe my kids won't either,
but eventually they will.
And the important thing is that the land is, is, um,
uh, is returning to us.
So I guess the point is that the, that the perspective that
brings, and I feel all tell Maori brings,
is a long intergenerational perspective.
And when you take that perspective,
it gives you a different approach, I think, to how,
how you manage the land as a resource. Amy.
Um, yeah, thanks, Callum.
Um, I think for, for our team specifically,
we think a lot about those encumbrances.
Um, because we are very limited,
if we think about the Reserves act from 1977 mm.
Um, I personally think it's quite outdated.
Um, but that doesn't mean
that we can't move into those spaces with our relationships
where we are looking at future implementation
and how those classification mechanisms can be adapted.
And we often look to other iwi in terms of
what that means for them.
And we know that particularly with, they're doing a lot
of work in that space around, um, reserve classifications.
And so that's something that's always at the top
of our minds and the, the first conversation
that we have in, in a lot
of those management planning situations.
Yeah. I'm gonna be just while,
Um,
um, my question is quite broad
and long term, um, I think just following on from, um,
David, in terms of treaty settlements are supposed
to be the start of a partnership,
but they're usually the ending of a relationship.
Um, and so I think, how do you think, uh,
um, have been able to, uh, fulfill those
or meet those meet halfway
with public service, public services?
And how can those partnerships, um, occur in the future
for remaining iwi who wish to settle in the next 10 years?
Oh, some of the 30,000 foot view as usual, um, um, I mean,
it's obviously a very good question.
Um, one of the things our CEO, uh,
you might know our CEO helmet, he, he likes to say is that,
um, we we're plotting our own path.
Um, and we're ploting our own path
because we don't have a good history
of being able to rely on anyone else.
So, um, so the, the, the, the settlement is a, um,
is a start to that.
Um, but as I said that that doesn't extend it to all aspects
of the things that we want to want to affect.
And so things like to, to tie our, um,
cultural redress we have, we have to work together.
Um, when we were sitting here, um, in our office yesterday,
thinking about what we would say today, um, we work
with a lot of territorial
authorities, about nine I think it is.
And, uh, because Greater Wellington Regional Council is on
the table for us today, we were thinking, what can we say,
you know, what, what could they do better?
And, um, what came up to us was, well,
they could mentor the others more.
Yeah, they, they do.
But, you know, compared to the
others, they, they do a great job.
They, they really do. Um, you know,
there are some territorial authorities that, um,
could pick up their, their, their, um, their game a bit.
Um, but working together, um, is the only way to,
to fix a lot of these things.
The, the, um, put it on Harbor Record is a good example of
where we can work together,
where we must work together as we're going forward.
When we took it to the Marai, um, UA at the TI got up
and said, why are we signing another one?
You know, the point that they're making is,
we've been down this road before, you know?
And, and so, uh, we, there is that, um,
concern I think within the iwi that are we just, you know,
spinning our wheels going
through the noises, are we gonna make real change?
We're committed to make real change,
but we have to do it as a partnership.
Cool. Um, so just coming back to your question,
particularly around, um, other iwi who haven't settled.
Uh, so a, a prime example in, um, within the
of is the A federation, which is a makeup of,
so, so we are, and our is very interconnected.
Um, we, we whanau right up the coast,
and so we are very aware that our, um, have not, um,
reached a place where the, um, in, in a settlement yet.
Mm-hmm. Um, but that doesn't mean
that we don't enable those opportunities to make sure, um,
that we're supporting our FAA through those processes.
And an example is the Queen Elizabeth Park management plan
that cannot go through to completion without,
because of the significance that they have to that anyone,
and it's same, same right up the coast.
And so it's, yeah. How does
support our ang in those situations, um, so
that when they get to that settlement process, uh,
it's an easier process for them. Yeah.
Cool. Done you, any questions?
Um, if you don't mind, absolutely Rema.
Um, can I just ask you, thank you very much
for everything you're sharing today.
Um, member of t um, I wanna ask please,
if you don't mind, um, you look very young over there,
but for the rest of a mature gentleman Yeah.
What are you saying, um, gentleman, um,
when he all start, when, when, um, the,
the legislation was passed.
And so I, okay, so now we're gonna start
in a, I'm sorry to put it this way.
Ticking off the boxes of what, what, um, those easier boxes
and then the difficult ones.
Um, how was, I know you're saying
that Winton Regional was, is pretty good right now.
How was, how was it back then?
Um, navigating and getting into the rhythm?
I, I think in, maybe this is a good, good question
for the regional council, um,
but from my recording, uh,
the councils al always had a really good collaborative
relationships with all the iwi in the region.
I think a tahi was the, um, the body
or the group with all the different representatives.
And of course that would've been all in a
pre-settlement space.
Uh, and I can only see improvement as we've,
as we've moved into post settlement.
But like Amy was saying, uh, not leaving the other iwi
behind who, who have not yet settled.
So, so I think they've always kind
of been a leader in this space.
Mm-hmm. Uh, greater Wellington.
And, and I think that's like,
and what Colin was saying about the Potter Harbor accord,
uh, it would not have been possible without
greater, greater
welling. Greg, did you have a question?
Thank you. Did you have any, did you have a follow up?
You go, um, have more, um, I Greek living from Mongo ki here
in Auckland, um, you expressed, um, Robert, um,
en enthusiasm about the, uh,
auditor generals report, which was lovely.
'cause um, you've had different reactions to it.
I, I presume that you, um, what you mean is
that you appreciated the focus, that stronger focus
that he's putting back on the, on the, um, the honoring
and the, um, the application
of the working out of the treaty.
So within that, again, just building on, on
that question there, where, where are,
could you give us some examples of, um, of pressure points
that you've hit with councils other than, um, GWRC?
Um,
I, I think the, the smaller councils do, do have challenges
with re resourcing.
And that's, um, that's not a, you know, state secret.
Uh, I, I think also our,
we've got quite set priorities,
for example and so forth.
We haven't yet done a lot of work in, for example, um,
with our redress in the top of the south.
Um, so, so I think when we, when we, when we build up
and we are actually in a place to build on,
especially say the Pataki plan, which reaches into
the Mara sounds in te, um,
will be definitely on the phone
with the borough District Council then.
Right. And we are hoping at that point, um,
'cause I think many councils will be afraid to, um,
make a move in this space without,
without a lead from the iwi.
And that's fair enough.
So I think for a council like Marlborough, I'm,
and I'm sure when the time comes with our arch plan,
which also goes into Port Underwood, um, for anyone
who knows that area, um, beautiful part of the country.
Um, but yeah, so, so I think it's, um,
what am I saying here?
That, that I think the guidance
and direction comes from the iwi,
and then I'm sure the councils will
step up to, to the plate.
Yeah. I'd like to offer for an example as well, which is,
which is more, um, uh, artificial, um, barriers really.
Um, but what I mean by that is we,
we've been focusing a lot today on putting your
hunger in the health of it.
One of the greatest, um, sources
of pollutants into it is the Pudi stream now
that comes from, um, from the Johnsonville area.
It plays from, from south,
and there's a lot of industrial industrial area
in construction up there.
So it carries the pollutants there.
Now, of course, the issue that, that we're dealing
with is the pollutants in port,
but the source
of those pollutants is the Wellington City Council.
Right. You know, so getting the, getting the same, uh,
focus on both of those is, is, is a challenge. Did
You have anything to add?
Do you, do you, um, you know,
we talk about consistency a lot today, getting that through.
And, uh, one of the things that happens
with the elected bodies such as councils, as you get a, uh,
a refresh, we'll call it that every three years.
Mm-hmm. Um, have you observed, uh, the consistency
or the lack of consistency changing mm-hmm.
Through those, uh, that, that cadence of, of change itself?
Not so much. Yeah. So probably the question,
let's frame this differently, like with the change
of the governance is, is the, the, the establishment,
the set up, the policy, and that within the, um, the,
the council itself is stronger than the actual, the change
of the, of Yeah.
I think you're right. And there's probably more,
we feel the change more
with every three years in central government,
more than the changes in local government, I feel.
Yeah.
Some recent observation.
Um, any last questions from Memphis?
Uh, oh, sorry. Sorry.
I, I, I just to add that too,
especially if there's restructuring,
like we've seen niwa join, uh, yeah.
I should know the name of the new agency and e Sr.
So those sort of central government research
restructuring can be quite disruptive too.
But just can, can we just get
to the, the, the number of that?
Is that a, because there's a change
of relationship personnel.
What, what has actually changed in, in,
I think it can be the change of direction of the agency.
Okay. But also changes of resourcing,
but also personnel as well. So it's
Probably all three. Because
I noticed, uh, well, my observation, um, is, is that
with the different, uh, iwi entities is, is, uh,
when they're changing people, it's like starting
Again. Starting again,
Yeah. Go through the
cups of tea to get the
relationship going together.
That's, there's always challenges.
There's, there's challenges there.
Yeah. Okay. Hey, our time is, is has come
to an end, I've got to say.
Uh, well, a couple of things. I realize you've got some
challenges and you've, you've conveyed that very well,
but you've also got some great
successes from my observation.
And so congratulations.
Thank you, uh, for the progress that you've made, uh, with,
uh, within your powers at b uh, we, we have an opportunity
as a select committee to be able
to have an impact here within the crown.
And, uh, we're just trying to get clarity of
where we can best do that itself.
And, and what you've presented this morning
is, so thank you.
Thank you to the three of you
for bringing this forward to us today.
Your Honor, thank, by the way,
you can stay here if you wish for, for greater.
I'm sure you won't hear what they have to say as well,
so that's good.
Go the tea. Yeah.
And with that, can I please invite the greater ones
and Regional council up please?
Thank you. Same.
Excuse me, Nigel. We're just gonna grab a Yeah,
No problem.
Change over,
Um, greater Wellington Council, thank you very much
for coming forward
and I must say very comprehensive
information you provided us.
Thank you. And, uh, what it, uh, from the outset,
I'm sure we'll be talking about some
of the challenges you got, but from the outset, I think, uh,
where Greater Wellington Regional Council is today is
to be celebrated in some ways.
It's, it's, it's very good and very comprehensive.
I couldn't help but notice some of the pitches you had here
with some of the signings, uh, yes.
Going all the way back to Chairman of the day
of Stuart McCaskill. Was it?
Correct? That's exactly right.
And of course, you've also had a very strong leader in,
in Dame f Frank Wild as well,
who I know personally was a great advocate
for De Maori and everything there.
So it helps when you've got leadership
Kia David That's in that space itself.
So with that, um, Nigel, uh, I'll leave it to you
to perhaps provide some opening, uh, commentary
before we get into a bit of a discussion. So there
You go. Thank you,
Nigel.
So I'm the Chief executive
of the Arlington Regional Council,
greater Arlington Regional Council.
Uh, it's a real pleasure to be here
and, um, I'll let the team introduce themselves
before we go into the next stage.
Uh, morning.
Right. And sisters are from England, island,
Scotland to be here with you.
Kia Carl J So yes, th thank you for having us.
We're really happy to be here.
Um, we are very proud
of our story at Greater Wellington Regional Council.
So we saw this whole process with a, uh, report
and our invitation to be involved as real opportunity
to tell part of that story, but also learn more.
We have been on a constant evolution of, uh,
a journey in our partnership.
Um, and we'll talk a little bit about that,
but it's something that we're completely committed to
and I think it's fantastic that the a OG did this, uh,
review and that we had the opportunity to be involved.
So, so thank you for that.
Before we start, um, you would normally have one
of our elected members here, but we've just had our, our,
uh, elections and our regional councilors don't get sworn in
until 30th of October.
And at the moment we don't have a council chair,
'cause our council chair gets selected at the same time.
So you'd have three staff members you would
otherwise have, uh, had a, um, uh, one
of our senior council leaders here as well.
Um, ani at, we are a kind of a typical regional council
with all the typical regional council functions.
The only things I would kind of emphasize in relation to,
um, our, and, uh, our functions.
We obviously have a very large public transport function,
um, and probably outside of, uh,
Auckland's the largest transport
function in, in the country.
We have a very, very large regional park network,
which is all about the, and how we manage the, um,
which is probably a little bit unique.
And we also are under the process
of transitioning our bulk water functions,
which is effectively the water supply into our new metro
water, um, uh, model that's been worked on at the moment
amongst the, our region.
So same, same,
but a bit different in terms of their functions and
therefore our partnerships and relationships.
Uh, we would like to acknowledge AWA
and on whose UA parliament, uh, sits,
and also would very much like to acknowledge
how our partners who just, uh, presented
before us, um, as you heard,
that hasn't always been straightforward,
but it's been a very constructive partnership
that we value hugely.
And I think you've heard a number of the areas in which
they're an example and in fact, many respects in example, of
how we do partner across the region.
Uh, now Monarch and I were both interviewed by the a IG, uh,
process, which we enjoyed.
And we'll just quickly go through,
I know you have a presentation now.
We'll, we'll talk to that kind of briefly.
You've probably had a chance to read it as well.
So we don't want Bo recently go
through every slide if you want a conversation.
We are happy to be interrupted at any point through this.
So it is a short time we have with you. Indeed.
So the more conversation we have, get those first.
So we'll assume most of it's read,
but we have, um, we've got, uh, six month offender partners.
And one point that was raised at the start is that yes,
we did have in very, uh, very good memory, uh, David
and rda, however, the start
of it was when the regional council first started.
The point I wanna emphasize is actually the,
our four bearers, uh, which none
of us were here then at political level as well
as a partnership level, really responded to the, uh,
establishment of the council, but also invite at the time
and the open door approach that the mother partners had
to actually to how we want to engage.
And we started to lean into
that relationship right from the start
of the existence of the council.
Uh, and we, you mentioned political leadership.
We've had strong political leadership throughout
as a fundamental, uh, essential element for organizations
to allow strong partnership to development.
I do want to acknowledge many of our previous
and, uh, current, uh, councilors
and chairs who have allowed that to happen.
Um, some stories we can tell about
how some of those things happened as well.
Um, but the, hey, you seen in the slide deck
as well across our entire region.
Uh, and we are working, uh, with four settled, uh,
partners across our region.
We're working with two PSGs at the moment as well.
So we have a diverse, uh, set of relationships
with various stages of the evolution of the partnership
and their settlement processes.
So one slide, if you could just pop through
to another slide over, is controlling those.
Yes. That slide A bit hard to read with being your pack,
but that is a really important slide for us
because that's our journey of evolution
around our partnership from a initial of,
of understanding through to working with Iwi as they go
through their settlement processes,
but also evolutions in there that were done proactively
by the council at the time.
And I've been around this regional council
for a little period of time so I can talk with some, um,
authority around this
'cause I was involved in most of those things.
But they looked at planning, uh, processes
that actually responded to the expectations
of mano at the time
around their involvement in decision making
and our regional policy statement's.
A very good example of that,
which then evolved into a process right now.
We looked at our regional planning constructs.
So we, um, feel that we leaned into not only what we thought
as an organization, but particularly
what we heard back from our partners as to what they valued
around that relationship and what was meaningful.
And that has changed and evolved over the whole period
of time that we've been in this partnership
and that adaptability
and that ability to actually move through and respond
and look at your own organizational structures
and your constructs
and how you orientate yourself to be responsive to that
and allow yourself
to actually respond to what you are hearing.
So that's all I really wanna say on that slide
'cause there's a lot of content in there.
Um, but, uh, I'll, we just do this around a bit,
but as I, as I said, David, there's any questions,
any point we we're very happy to be pause.
We will
Do you wanna should jump to me mon,
or do you wanna go back pathways?
Oh, I think it's really just important for us to recognize
that actually it's about us transforming as an organization.
So we transform at the speed of each of the six ewi.
As you heard, there were four of the six that are settled.
Each one of those settlements
and the way we, um, respond to each,
um, entity are different.
And so where we are, um, obviously, um,
able to slow ourselves down in order to wait
for the pace if you, we will.
But there are other iwi
that are working at different paces as well.
So sometimes it's a bit clunky
because when you're a regional council, you really need
to make sure you understand also the,
of each of the six iwi, um, mentioned
before the art confederation.
So that's another iteration for us as councils
to actually understand that we work with, um, um, to
that collective as well as the
individual iwi at place and space.
Um, and actually we are also, uh, working with councils,
the TAs so that we actually, uh, collectivize up
and make sure that we utilize the time of iwi efficiently so
that the transformations all the time
and partnerships that need to evolve.
And we actually move ourselves to meet the needs of iwi,
but sometimes clunky for us as councils
because we're used to operating in different ways.
Um, so yeah, we, uh, we are often looking at our own, um,
behaviors and thinking what we can do different. Mm-hmm.
I noticed that you, you have a appointment
of representatives on certain committees, is that correct?
Within one of the signs?
Yeah, that's correct. Last training,
we had a ity committee, which was a committee of council
that had, uh, all councils on it.
And that was, uh, uh, a new committee that we had had
that the previous, uh, council set up
that was specifically talking about ity obligations
and how we were responding to those.
There's a paper that Carl attached in the, in the document,
the last paper that went to that committee actually about
how we're going in that regard.
And we have had a very variety of approaches
to involving man around the political table, uh,
whether it's on committees or last long term plan.
We did, we set up a different committee structure
that invited man FE
to be involved on the long long-term plan committee,
which is quite an important, uh, step in that.
The long-term plan is obviously
where all the council budgets are set across all our
functions which allow involvement
and actually the whole construct of what we are planning
to deliver for the next three
and 10 years of their involvement in that.
Again, that was a, um, you know, it worked quite well,
but probably not as well as it could have.
So we're, you know, this new council again, be looking at
what other institutions can be put in place to involve
around the table and information and decision making.
Uh, with, with
with the council, with the elected management,
How do you meet the challenge? Like
in the groupings
that we had in the previous slide there of the six perhaps,
uh, uh, groupings itself?
Yeah. Uh, there, um, that becomes quite a big table.
How, how do you manage the representation?
You just purely, you have it from each of them
or do you get them?
Like, could you talk about that?
No, great question. I'll, I'll, I'll start pass them on.
So it's a, it is always a interesting conundrum as to how,
uh, you do solve that.
But our general perspective
and what we've certainly heard from ENO were that actually,
um, they are in our region and the greater, greater,
but they actually stand, uh, together,
but also they have their own aspirations in particular parts
of their, so we, we go
and ask most important thing to say is actually transform
how we might look at things.
And we have learned and evolved over time
as well when perhaps early days we didn't really ask.
Now we go and ask actually, well, what will work for you
and what sort of construct will work for you in a kind
of governance sense and
where would you like to be most involved?
Now, typically that does mean that
for we would have a representative
from each of our partners.
Yeah. And we have evolved our practice
and the way we structure things.
But mon do you wanna add anything to that?
Yeah, I think, um, it's important to recognize
that the relationships we're trying
to establish on all levels, governance,
management, and operations.
Mm. So as we are working in the operations space,
that's feeding up to the management space.
We're active in managing the relationships at both
governance and, um, management so
that we make sure we can unlock things early if things are
becoming a problem, um, and
or where we can celebrate and lean more into.
So, um, we, we we're setting up a system, system
that invests in relationship
and invests in resourcing so that we are,
we're moving towards equity. Mm-hmm.
Yeah, that's a really good point
because, you know, again, over,
over the years I talked about the regional policy statement.
At that point of time, there's absolutely no requirement,
certainly wasn't related to any treaties in
around the region that we brought man into the table
to look at your preeminent piece of policy construct.
And that was a member from each of the iwi set up, uh, a set
of principles and a vision for what was trying
to achieve around that partnership.
Then, then that, that developed original policy statement.
But what we've also evolved to
and heard back very strongly from, uh,
and our partners is actually
what is also important now is we've evolved those areas of
how we interact in partnership is yes,
there's a policy construct that yes, there's ltps,
but actually what is happening on the ground, the feno
that they actually represent, how do we actually start
to talk about it putting the policy construct into delivery
on the ground in partnership?
And Nati talked briefly about rangers on their ua,
things like that are where we are now looking to evolve,
you know, as quickly as we can,
as effectively can partnership
because we are responding again to
a decision making aspiration around the political table,
but particularly to actually what's gonna happen on the,
to actually lead to better outcomes, uh, for ua,
our partnership and t So that's a, um,
interesting evolution,
which is really quite logical when you think about it,
but it does take a strong partnership to able have
that caveat of, to actually get to the point you can have
the conversations. Very good point, Steve.
Yeah, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, on that question of tayo, I mean obviously a thriving,
healthy, healthy biodiversity, um, is to the benefit
of the entire community.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and I wonder how when, uh,
there's been land returned
and the responsibility for maintaining the integrity of
that biodiversity falls upon the iwi Mm.
How you work that relationship to make sure, um,
the regional councils doing its bit mm-hmm.
And in real world terms mm-hmm.
Resources, People, funds, um,
and how, how do you manage that to make sure
the collective benefit Yep.
Of a healthy tayo is paid
for equally or
Yep. Um,
I'm gonna hand to mon with, I'll have something to say
as well or Kyle, but one of you guys can kick that
Off. Yeah. I think it's
one of the responsibilities we take quite
seriously in the settlements, uh, the role of ourselves
as organizations to fund those settlements as well.
So whilst it might sit currently in the remit
of our council, we're also looking for what does it look
to be back in the remit of the iwi
and the continued resourcing
that's required from us to support that.
So it is constant, um, you know, evolving,
transforming, negotiating.
So one real life example of that is
to answer your question is around, um, the, um,
Tara settlement
and there's the leg spot out at East Harbo Regional Park,
um, that was, uh, gift back
and we, uh, work in partnership
with a co-management arrangement as a result
of the treaty settlement to manage
that fen and that lake together.
Now that comes with our ongoing involvement
as original council managing the looking at biodiversity,
pest management, et cetera.
It also comes with partnership
and actually how we look to devolve
and provide resourcing to work in partnership.
There's a joint governance committee around that.
Uh, and that is all about the things you talk about,
restoring that, uh, area in a way that is meaningful
to mano meaningful to the community.
And it allows for access, it allows for the public
to participate in that with a certain cultural sites in
there that have been protected.
So, um, that is a strong commitment, whether it's
through a treaty settlement as such,
or where there's obvious ways that we can work
and partner around the ua that actually makes sense.
That is where we are at.
And I think we don't need to wait necessarily at all for,
for treaty settlement to look at areas of the UA
that you say, well actually logically this would be an area
where we do partner, we do share resource,
and we look for joint outcomes. Stop you. Absolutely.
Yeah. So do I, um, interpret from that, that
where there's a shared object you can get on with, um,
coming up with arrangements to meet
that objective and work together? Yeah.
Um, this is gonna, sorry. Oh no, you go
Just a sub. I
think it follows on for this and then might,
this might sound a bit more granular in the detail I'm
asking about here, but you would've seen in the Auditor
General's report about crown entities
and the way in which they are incentivized
that they are almost to the crew point of KPI to be able
to actually deliver the outcome itself.
So with regards to the Greater Wellington Council Mm.
Um, could you talk to potentially, are there, uh,
these KPIs in place through the structure, um,
what is the resourcing, what is the construct of it there?
And when I talk about resourcing,
we're talking both internally within your organization,
paying for the people that are associated with it,
but also what external resourcing there is to actually help
iwi help Maori in
participating in conversations decision making Yeah.
About doing the MAHI type thing. Could you talk about
Thanks. Yeah. So I'll turn to Carl
for the first,
but the question was around the, um, mechanism of the data.
Then Martin and I can talk about our
internal resourcing to answer you.
So we, we do have KPIs internally more broadly
in terms of our partnership.
And I suppose as part of the OAG report,
we were already on our way,
and it was good to have a, I suppose,
an independent look in.
So we have refining our approach to, um,
reporting specifically on the settlements to our governance.
So we, um, uh, you'll see in the paper that we
provided our update to our committee, there's the full list
and the, of the commitments in the back,
if you count those rows,
there's 64 specific commitments in there.
Um, but you also see there's a, um, intent for us to review,
and it's a further conversation about the holistic intent,
but not just box ticking, what those particular, um,
mechanisms are in there.
Um, we have, uh, I'll come back around
to the question in terms of holistic intent.
We'll see some of the, um, crown acknowledgements
and the apologies that are included in the slide deck.
So, um, uh, as council, we've committed
for into our annual report for, um,
for this coming financial year
and quarterly reporting, uh, that we'll be working on
with our partners in terms of
looking at the, of content of those.
Just before we move off the KPI conversation,
and, uh, I'm sort of pressing upon this, uh,
if you did not have KPIs within your, uh, contracts
and all that, do you think you'd get a different outcome?
How important is KPIs in, in delivering it? Mm.
It's a very, it's a very sort of pointed question. Yeah.
But I, I want, I I asked for some honesty about that. Yeah.
Because, uh, I personally, and,
and we've discussed this about the construct of the crown
and actually how it's delivering, its in sense.
So it's, it's a question specifically about KPIs
through the structure Yeah, yeah.
And the importance of those KPIs in delivering the incentive
for those managers, for those people
to deliver the outcome. Uh,
I, I think that's essential.
Yeah. Right. Um, in terms of, uh, KPIs for, um, Nigel,
but also in the KPIs for the leadership team in terms of,
we've had the discussion about specific commitments
and the responsibilities of those commitments across,
um, the leadership team.
Um, and, and more broadly in terms
of our, our financial planning, it's essential that those,
um, yeah.
The, the responsibilities are there
and that, that's driven down because
otherwise it may, it may turn to, or,
and I've heard from some of the other presentations about
deferring to the Maori unit to be, um, responsible
for delivering on all the commitments for the
Organization. Yeah. Don't mean to be appointed
question.
No, my point is that it actually provides individuals,
individual human beings are incentivized Yeah.
To deliver outcomes. And when it is a KPI, it's a line item.
Yep. There, it provides a focus of actually
what am I actually delivering?
And it's, and I'm just trying to see the importance of that,
because it's not always the case in my, here in the crown.
Yep. And that is the case,
and I actually think it's almost an imperative
and we're gonna get a different outcome.
Yeah. Just you want to add one?
Yeah, just add, we've gotta make sure
I'm measuring the right things though.
Yeah. Like point,
we could provide you a summary report on the 64,
um, specific commitments.
Um, but is that actually meeting the holistic intent
of the settlement and the overarching relationship
and what was aspired to through that redress?
So the incentives have gotta be in the right place.
And it's, so it's also not
to talk greater Wellington sees our performances.
It's, it's how we're assessed by,
Yeah. Thanks. I
was just gonna add to something.
It is a good question. You do.
So I agree with Carl, but I think it's an, and,
and you need to have good KPIs.
You need to understand and have clarity about
what expectations are around, around, um, delivery
and, and that partnership.
But that does have to the risk of two rigid KPIs,
particularly it's measuring the wrong things.
That's where people go to measure
the strength of the partnership.
Yeah. That is not the strength of the partnership.
So I think you need both to actually start
to incentivize change where it needs to happen.
And you need to be able to monitor and measure and,
and kind of quantify what is actually happening
through a good KPI framework.
But my point here is that, that it is,
it is not the whole answer.
It's only actually a small part of the answer
to actually get those great outcomes,
which I know you weren't compliant.
It was, but that, that, that's the expanding
of the response to your good
Question. And I, so from interesting.
The other bit
To compliment it, Would you say is, uh, an
Intrinsic commitment
To the quality of the relationship?
Yes. That's really the core
Of it.
Look, it is the core. 'cause it,
we will fail on our K if we don't have that foundation.
Fundamentally, if we don't have a strong relationship
where you can actually have a, a genuine partnership,
and actually you address those KPIs together
with the joint ones, they sit independently,
that they're kind of all our, at the end of the day.
And that's success, that partnership being the success
of the KPIs, but more so the success of
what those KPIs are, meeting them unlock.
And I think that, that that's the key point around.
And then with Carl's point,
they've gotta be the right measures.
They've got to be actually measures that have meaning
for the holistic intent of what that settlement looked like.
Yeah, I understand that. Sorry, Cal
for interrupted you. No, no,
That was, that was my answer.
Yeah. So, so just, just moving on to the, the, the,
the resourcing, the construction of your,
So my team, there's 18 of us in the team.
Wow. We are ma Maori experts.
We are Maori experts in wha
and we aren't there necessarily as cultural advisors as such
as transformers of the system.
So along with the KPIs, we are looking at
what actually we need
to create a different pathway in our organization
that actually brings more, um, Maori
and UA into the space so that they, they, they create
and operate from a ua, um, articulation
of priorities and strategies.
So in our group, we would say our KPIs actually
go back to the six iwi.
What are we able to unlock, what we are able to unlock
that returns the URI of each of those iwi back to the,
to do some of the work that we are privileged to do
that across all of our systems that potentially should
or could be delivered by, um, udi,
which ultimately is the true measure of success, isn't it?
Mm-hmm. To to Maori itself. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, ma, just say, so, so there,
so there's 18 FTE within your team
who are focused entirely on this.
So we have, um, our mana, uh, partnership team. Yeah.
So they are working actively into
and on the relationship that works
with MANA at place, right.
Building that, um, bridge between the, um, the Iwi
and the organization.
We then have ma so that's not about
our organization delivering the maga
that's about creating the system
and the ways in which FIN will bring in to our organization,
the MA there iwi into the system
that helps us design the right outcomes
for the programs of work that we do.
And then we have the outcomes group,
and that group focuses on the data, the reporting, the,
the metrics that we need for right.
Reporting against our, um, outcome framework.
And we have our policy advisors, our senior po,
our principal advisors,
and they're looking into the, um, central government spaces,
and they're looking at what's coming.
And we are helping to shape ahead of, um,
legislation becoming, um, you know, set a notion, right.
We are hope we, we are creating a system
that helps our organization to, um, design.
Thank you. So the third of those four,
when you talk about the data that you work with, does
that speak to what we were just discussing a few minutes
before in terms of the, in terms of the KPIs
that you would see are key?
Can you give us some examples of what those are? The
KPIs, but also the, the investments that we have with Mano
what those investments are actually achieving.
And it's not a, um, you know, we, we've,
we've given X amount of money to do some work.
It's actually what's the outcomes?
So it is the return of UDI to Thea.
It is the work that we then can co-create in the operation
space, in the management space,
in the governance space as well.
So, well, yeah. It's a multi-pronged approach to reporting
that is greater than just we've done this.
Is that, um, is that reporting publicly available?
Uh, it, it's, um, it is actually publicly available
to our treaty committee.
And we've actually, so we have two sets of funding
that go out to ua.
Um, part of that is actually in the long-term plan process
where there is funding to each of the six iwis
for their strategic, um,
investments helps set up their policy advisors there, um,
contributes towards their senior leadership
creating equity in that space.
Okay. Because we're trying to write
what was often just one person
in a 0.5 position in an office that had a whole lot
of agencies coming to that one person.
Sure. And all
of those cars were up the drive wanting to see one person.
Mm-hmm. Sure. And so by creating
that layer in the strategic space, it gives myself, Nigel,
our general managers, that opportunity to go in
and work on that relationship
and look at the priority setting, et cetera, as much
as the operation space where, um, URI want
to be delivering on pest management,
biodiversity, et cetera, et cetera.
So a whole system approach inside the organization also,
that actually sh shifts some of
that resourcing and revolves. That's
Just the last one. This is
absolutely fascinating, um,
because, um, NA obviously spoke about the excellent example,
uh, relationship that and
and respect that they have for J'S work,
and actually used the phrase best thing
that could happen would be for you guys
to mentor, uh, other councils.
Um, the, that what, what you've just been speaking about
for the last two or three minutes, that sounds like
the black box to potentially be revert into other councils
and, and, and speaks to
what the chair was asking about the kind
of outcomes that are measured.
I get Yeah. And I use the term black box because,
because in the absence of, I mean, I a hundred percent get
the caveats that were placing around it at, at, at,
at the same time because these are public funds that are,
that are involved, which is why
we're having the discussion here.
Yeah. Um, we, we, we do need to drill down.
And, and it sounds like you guys are effectively doing that.
Yeah. So being able to understand what it is
that you are doing that is getting such an effusive response
from your EV partners, what could be very
Powerful. Yeah. So
we, we feel we can present that information
and we do have it, and it's part of how we contract
and the mechanisms that Monica was just talking about.
Yeah. To actually deliver
that public funds into mano partnership,
but also actually there's an accountability
for everyone in that process as well.
So, and that is based on outcomes
and how we deliver our particular projects.
Uh, and, you know, we've all evolved in that space.
So, um, uh, there's, we can share that very,
And just to note that we're actually accountable
to every rate payer for everything that we spend.
So yeah, we do have the systems
that support that reporting. Mm-hmm.
I was just gonna say, uh, Nigel, you've been in the, uh,
sector for a long time.
Yeah. There's lots of good practice around the tu
around New Zealand, uh, that local government,
it's almost like, what's the,
the Maori saying about the KU doesn't
talk of it own sweetness.
So it's, it's a little bit, it's a bit like that is, is, uh,
you don't push yourself upon others
unless you're invited to go and talk to them.
It's one of the challenges that we have
my belief in in Yeah.
In, uh, local government secret. So,
Yeah. No, thanks,
David. Look, I mean, I have been around
for a while and I've seen this transition a lot
around the country, around the motto,
it's not consistent everywhere,
which is why this is such a good piece of mahi
that the crown has undertaken.
Mm-hmm. Um, and, um,
but we have steadily
and deliberately gone on a journey for our organization.
I do wanna reemphasize what you said
with strong political leadership throughout as well.
Yeah. Uh, but we've been very deliberate
and increasingly deliberate about actually how we partner
and what that means and what that means for the fennel
for outcomes for our mano partners.
And also increasingly what it means
for us as an organization.
Now, mon talked about some of the people
and her are part of the organization.
Those people also reach across the organization.
We're all fundamentally delivering the same outcomes
to our region and our partners.
And, you know, it, it's kind of, um,
we have an organizational construct like all organizations
do, but the, the, the beauty to make this work is actually
how that feeds out and into your own.
And how all the work we do across everything we do
by way statutory functions
actually start to deliver better outcomes.
So it's kind of, you know, it,
But sometimes that way requires a transformation in how,
Um, I really appreciate the money that you are doing.
And I think it's estimate we're talking about a ku
but on the flip side is we usually, it's the person
who eats the KU who speaks.
If it's, um, you know,
and saying the strength of Nazi to present
to select committee this morning is testament
to the great relationship building
that has been going on behind the scenes.
My question though, uh, understanding that a lot
of these processes are crown led processes around designed,
um, I'm interested to know from you, Monica,
but all three of you, especially in the design of, um,
or leaning into the UA relationships with meaning, um,
and with genuine, uh, interest
and all of that, um, the design
of conflict resolution processes, especially for ua,
as I can see, six, um, iwi, very strong iwi ua, not just,
but how do you manage, um, overlapping interests
or iwi who don't necessarily agree mm-hmm to disagree,
but who find, you know, um, sensitivities
around legislative changes, all of that.
But it's really around processes are they,
that are being designed inside the,
Well, previously it was led by agencies such as ourselves,
but as iwi build their, um, resourcing
and their capacity, not the capability, the capacity, uh,
we begin to become the retainer.
And so that's actually one of the, um,
important things for us to learn.
So when you have in the Harbo accord, we are the retainer in
that process now because it's Iwi lead.
So it is, it is evolving systems internally so
that we now understand
what we enable rather than we may have
been previously the lead.
And, and something significant like that.
The relationships are pivotal, um,
everybody working on them.
And sometimes we're not always gonna agree.
So what do you come to at the end of that agreement?
It's a continued position
and a starts, you know, which, um, where each other stand,
but you agree to carry on working.
And that's, that's the thing that probably takes the time
to, um, constantly, uh, work on.
'cause it's, we're not always gonna agree. Mm-hmm.
Um, but for most part we're,
we're actually really in the space of ourselves listening,
evolving, and transforming. Yeah.
Supplementary. Um, is that a critical, uh,
right now in this, these early stages of evolving
or transforming those processes internally with UA alongside
and learning from ua?
I understand the concept of being attain
in, in a relationship.
Um, but in terms of the design, from your perspective, is
that critical to allow for space
and hold the space for conversations to continue?
Yeah, that's completely critical. Yeah. Yeah.
I mean, you know, we have a relationship that will endure
and we need to make it work effectively as possible.
And sometimes you, you won't agree,
but you do have to hold that space.
And that goes to the foundations of a strong relationship.
You can hold the space and that relationship doesn't break.
Um, so, but absolutely you need to allow that space.
And, and at, at times the council, either, whether the,
or the political entity of it, they need to just step back
and give that space and respect that space until, um,
our partners are ready to come on and work, talk to us.
And it's the other, the point, other point around that,
you know, we talk about partnership.
It is not one big holistic box.
It's, it's, you know, it's very, it's very, um, it's related
to that particular partner you have.
And, and, and one thing probably also learned over a period
of time, and we've heard more importantly, that actually we,
ahi someone mentioned that was our first pan council
committee in 19 91, 92 ish, 93.
But that still exists,
but it's not as an active, um, actively existing
because we've moved to a bilateral relationship more so
that reflects the aspiration
and the speed that different partners are able to go.
And probably, you know, 20 years ago it wasn't okay
to go at different speeds and that's what,
not what people wanted.
Now it's completely okay to go at different speeds
'cause we're actually responding more effectively
to the aspirations of our partners,
but we're also keeping the mind tact of those
who can't move us, could be respecting that. So, um,
And and part of that is really building the capability
internally of what we are actually articulating.
So that's where it becomes a problem.
If we don't understand it, if we are not listening
with intention, that's when it come,
can become a problem operationally.
So we do a lot of work internally to, you know,
understand the worlds that are actually presented.
And I might say, while we're talking about
Ks, none of this is easy.
You know, it's like we see. Yeah. Yeah.
We, we, we've, you know, we've been on the journey.
We're still on the journey. We ain't perfect
by any stretch of the imagination.
But, um, I think it's the intent that we try to,
we're talking about here, that makes,
I think the indication is we would like
to speed the boat up in some situations with regards
to the journey that the others are have having itself.
I'm sorry. So can I ask you, um,
The, your colleague that, um, isn't here today?
Cara? Is Kara here? Oh, Karara is here. Okay. Hello.
Karara partnerships manager.
So does, does, um, does partnerships manager another,
I'll ask the question.
She said she wasn't going or she
wondering who that pretty lady was.
So with the, um, role of partnerships manager,
'cause I hear, I hear you, um, Monica, that you're saying
that your team is about 18 people.
Um, does that include Cara's team or is it a separate team?
The ship management team?
Uh, in,
uh, just to answer your question, um, I am one
of the man partnership managers, um, our director Tanya,
um, as a part of four, there's four of us,
uh, a part of the wider
18. Right,
Okay. Alright. About four of you.
Sorry, you're saying? Yes, that's right.
And then there's team members. That's right. And yeah.
And, um, okay. And then there's your team, Monica?
No, so they're in my team.
They're, they're all in your team. Okay.
So the partnership managers bring the insights from the
Iwi and they bring it into the system of the,
and the Maori space so
that they're co-designing an OODLE law for
what the intentions of the iwi have articulated
and how we deliver it.
And we set the, um, conditions for success
and then how we go into the organ
and across the organization on, um, on
that, um, study. So
Just a couple of supplementary quick ones.
When were these, um, I, I hear how you're saying from couple
of decades ago, um, maybe more actually, um, that,
that the whole intention was to set things holistically
and where you're going for and everything.
But these type of, um, um, groups
and roles, when were they established?
And the second question, please, if you don't mind,
were they established, like I hear you say earlier
that it's not just about, um, cognition for the tick box
of what's in the settlement, um, the deed of settlement,
but there's a, there's more, um, more underlying,
but were these roles, um, created specifically to try
and achieve what the settlements?
Um, no, not necessarily. Okay.
No. Um, uh, prior to me coming on board,
there were probably about two, two
and a half people working
for the whole organization in a cultural advisory sense.
Um, and it's about evolving based on the insights of
what we are hearing from as to what you need
to set up in terms of the right, um,
system in the organization.
So we've grown
because we've needed to create the right conditions
and partnership we've already needed
to create the right outcomes in how we are
actually reporting the success of those partnerships.
And the then the role of Mato Maori.
So we've built twice in terms of iterations looking
to get this, this right, um, for the organization
and for, um, but there, there are,
there are growth based on the insights and the relationships
and the, um, and what we need to deliver as an organization,
both within our colleagues, but also back to,
So mom's been on board
for about eight years when mom was on board the, yeah,
we probably did have about 2, 3, 4 people maximum.
The evolution to what we're just talking about now happened
probably about four years ago.
Um, that's when I, I came into this role.
We looked at actually what we need to achieve
as an organization that was part of a broader change process
around our environment
and delivery functions, which included quite naturally
how we partner and get
environmental outcomes from offender as well.
So that's when the change occurred in terms of the, um,
the resourcing, but more particularly the reasons why it
changed and, and what it was intended to do.
Thank you. So based on partnership really, first
and foremost, and then
and as well as settlements. Yeah. Thank you.
What, uh, is the total, uh, number of staff at GWIC?
We've got about 850 staff.
Okay. And are you aware of other councils within your
RO who have, um, this kind of, of resource?
Mm-hmm.
Uh, yep. There are.
Most councils in RO have got a resource comparative
to the headcount, um, and, uh,
RO For, yeah.
And across regional council land, there's a whole variety
of different perspectives and approaches as to how, how, um,
different councils partners.
So, okay. I think that goes to a number of things.
It goes to how councils politically and, and the, and a root
and a staff sense approach, that level of partnership.
What goes actually, what's level
of resource you put into it,
the importance it's given in terms of your, your,
your own organization and the, and the sense of partnership.
So, um, you won't find,
and I'm sure you've asked this question,
most people come in, uh, to talk to you.
You won't find a consistent approach
or there's not a, there's not a ratio.
It's about actually how you look, uh, to be doing your mahi
to deliver, to do the outcomes.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you very much. Okay.
Any last, uh, burning questions though to mention?
Um, uh, look, my question is just,
I heard you mention earlier 64, um, uh, obligations
or treaty obligations.
Would you consider a,
and I dunno the answer to this, so I just, I really want
to understand, would you consider that a large number
for a regional council, uh, across the country?
Or is that relatively normal,
or, I mean, how, how would you place that in the context
of your peers?
Hmm,
Great question. Um,
I think in terms
of having previously worked at a national level, there are,
um, other regions that have more iwi, um,
certainly involved in and more commitments.
Um, they have plenty.
Another, um, organization that was interviewed,
um, Waikato certainly.
Um, so yeah, relative to other regional councils,
we may be somewhere in the middle,
but there are certainly other regions
who have more specific commitments.
And I guess the complexity changes, doesn't it,
depending on what you, what you're dealing with.
So, so of the 64, would they la sorry,
just carrying on Yeah.
Of the 64, would they, would you consider them
to be largely complex or, uh, transactional
or, um, divestment of land
or how would you break that down? Yeah,
There's a, um, quite an number
and proportion of that number to are to do
with the ANA statutory board.
Um, which is both in the,
and um, so, um,
those relate to appointments.
They relate to dispute resolutions.
They, um, the specific functions are bringing the
operational programs to the table, um, to that group.
Um, there are some in there that are property related
and easements on EV land have been transferred.
Um, uh, yeah, there is other,
other specific mechanisms there.
There's, there's a range. Yeah. Now
I would say a number are deeply complex,
particularly in the wider that Carl just talked about.
So that's about water ana.
There's a series of, um, uh,
issues in there about actually looking at how that fwa
is used and process of actually creating plans lead by UA
with participants that particular to that treaty settlement.
And that is a probably one
of the biggest issues facing our region of the next, uh,
three to five years working through that process.
It's great opportunity obviously,
but that absolutely is a direct
outcome of that treaty settlement.
Mm-hmm. Uh, which involves, um, you know, a huge level of,
uh, engagement complexity
because it's effectively going up a large chunk of
that wider up, um, rural mahana Valley.
So very, very complex.
Um, so things like that, um, obviously come with some, uh,
resource from the crown post settlement.
But I think one point we really haven't touched on is
actually how that then you've got that one outcome from the,
from your settlement process, but that as an example,
would go to your very good question.
I think we've got maybe yeah, a, a similar number.
It might be in the moderate ballpark,
but the level of some of the challenges you have
through the treaty settlements are not insignificant at all.
Mm-hmm. And it goes to hard
of all typical regional functions, actually all.
And can I have one more base president?
Uh, so just to build on that question,
when you are reporting, uh,
through your reporting mechanisms on treaty settlements,
do you report length of time complexity, uh,
cost to the organization? Mm
Mm We probably haven't separated it out specifically
for settlements as part of the broader partnership.
There are other responsibilities
that we have beyond the settlements.
Mm-hmm. Um, uh, um, recently,
uh, produced the iwi management plan, um, shared
and received by the council.
So there are other responsibilities.
I don't think we've separated them out specifically
for settlements and, um, our broader responsibilities.
Um, we do have specific people on, um, it's on center,
our partnership, um, managers, uh,
and then depending operationally what the workers,
there'll be other kind who would be involved in those.
Yeah. It'd be interesting exercise to explore.
They take water out, for example.
We're just talking about the not, we'd have to put a bit
of thought as to how you'd actually do that with, uh,
with a direct relationship back to an outcome
and a treaty seven as opposed to,
to normal business delivery,
the normalization like a ours would have.
Yes. And then how that might transition
because of a settlement process. So
Yeah, I mean, I guess there's a,
there's a balancing act isn't there with a, um,
with a trade off of, uh, if you take, for example, length
of time it takes to resolve Yeah.
Something. Um, but the complexity and the
Yes, that's right. Eric,
I'll leave it to you to that work through, in
The lead up to the settlement,
however, uh, there was 500,000 apportioned
to regional council to support the development of the plan
when we did a costing on what it actually cost to do a plan.
And, uh, that actually surfaced 5 million, which is actually
probably closer just to the development of the plan.
So that actually dispersed across both the entities
and the agencies who are all part of that design process.
But that's to, to develop the plan.
'cause it also takes into account all of the hearings
and all of the bits and pieces there.
So we, we know the costing for that and four
or five years ago, what it might cost today might
be a different matter.
I think it's an interesting exercise. It
Is. Yeah. Yeah.
Hey, um, our time is, is drawn to a place
and on behalf of the, uh, committee, thank you very much
for making the time available to, uh, come before us.
I found it very helpful and,
and interesting, uh, the journey that you've been on.
And I congratulate you on the commitment
that you make in this space here for your counselor,
for your community that you're doing.
And I think you've, uh, got some, uh, some just, uh,
examples of celebrating itself,
but understanding that this is a journey.
It must stop. It carries on, is, does, uh, relationships.
Relationships. So relationships
'cause they get maintained and carry on.
So thank you very much for coming along.
Congratulations on the great work
and I wish you well for the future.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.
Bye Keith.